All right, everyone, and welcome to one more new module.
And this is the expo notifications module.
So this is a chapter number one.
In this chapter, we are going to set the foundation for expo notifications.
And first of all, in this chapter, we are actually going to see what do you need to
know about notification and the type of notification like remote notification, local notification
and then going to create one expo application and then we need a development build for that
and then we are going to start implementing that one by one.
Alright, so first thing is before touching the code.
There are two very important thing you must understand about notification.
First thing is what is notification?
We can say that kind of a message in app message we wanted to send towards the user kind of
alright.
Notifications are on operating system level, not a app level.
This is a very important point.
So, notifications are not rendered by react native or JavaScript.
They are completely handled by us.
They are completely handled by the OS.
Perfect.
So, OS in the sense is you are using Android and is you are using we can say Apple.
I hope so that is making sense.
So for now let's focus on Android.
Perfect, so they are handled by Android OS and iOS OS.
Your app, we can say that your app only request or we can say trigger them.
Alright, so final control of your notifications are always with the operating system.
That is why we need a permission and need a permission for setting up the notification,
you know that cool.
So now the second thing is notification, notification can work even when app is closed, yes we know
that, we know that very well.
can work even when app is closed.
So notification are designed to work in a way when your app is not running.
So app is we can say that your app working in background when your app is killed.
Killed means basically you are forcefully stop them something like that when your phone
is off.
So notification still work in that case.
So, this is what make notification a very powerful distracting tool we can say that
alright.
So, now the types of notification we have perfect.
So, this is basically types of notifications that we have.
So, there are always two type of notifications.
So, the first type of notification is known as local notification.
What is this local notification?
Local notification are triggered directly from the device itself alright, it is triggered
from device itself alright.
We can say that whenever you are working with local notification, you don't need a internet.
Alright, so you can say no internet.
Then second thing you don't need even a backend for it.
So you can say no backend and then this is triggered by your app code and they works
offline very well.
Alright, so this is our local notifications.
So if I just try to give you some examples.
Let's say you are making a reminder application.
So after every 10 minutes you are going to get a notification, but that is offline notification,
alarm notification, a daily habit remainder notification, timer completion alerts.
So these are all the examples for your local notifications.
Perfect, now the second thing that we have is known as remote notification or push notifications,
these are just two words of same concept, so second thing that we have is the remote
or we can say that is as a push notification.
So, what is this?
Remote notification are always send from the server, alright.
They are always send from the server.
So, what is the things that you required for it?
Yes, you required internet.
Then second thing is you requires a proper backend for it, then uses push services.
There is a lot of push services for using the push notification.
So you need a push services and then work even if app is closed.
So yes, push notifications even work if your app is closed.
And if I just try to give you example for it.
So, we can say that a WhatsApp message, order status update, then you can have OTP notifications,
marketing push notifications, so these are all the notification that comes under this
push notification category.
Perfect.
So in this chapter, basically our main focus is on local notification and how we are basically
going to set it up.
Cool.
So again, one very important thing to understand push notification do not work in expoco.
Yes, I am talking about this push notification.
So for working with push notification, you need a development build.
But a local notification can work with expogo, but I think it is the right time.
Let's go and create a development build so that we don't have to re-create a new application
and then create a development build for that.
I don't want that.
Cool.
So, first thing first, let me just simply come into here and then I basically wanted
to do is.
create, bunx, create, expo app, add the latest.
And yes, I wanted to create that into the same folder.
Perfect.
And definitely let's just wait for the installation.
Alright guys, so now we have successfully installed it.
Now let me clear it.
And then first thing is always bun run.
a reset project because yes I wanted to reset my project and then simply say no and clear
it.
Alright, so what is going to be the next step?
Next step is going to be initialize a EAS build and then we are good to go.
So, for that what I wanted to do basically, let me just simply coming to here and then
say EAS build configure and I think before that let me coming to here and search here
expo notifications and then let me open this and after that first of all let me copy this
Perfect. And then hit Bunn-X.
expo install expo notifications.
So this is basically going to install this package for us.
Alright, so now we have installed it successfully and after this what I wanted you to do is
we can definitely just move ahead and start using it.
Next step is just simply run this, not this, just give me a minute.
Let me cut this out.
Cool.
So next step is EAS build configure.
Perfect.
Nice.
Let me hit this up.
So this is basically going to hit a configuration.
Now they are saying EAS build project not configured.
Would you like to automatically create a project?
Yes, create that for me.
And all right, now they are creating it.
Perfect.
For which platform?
Definitely Android and is built when you are ready to create it.
Nice.
And after this, definitely let's move ahead and install this bunx expo install.
So this is going to bunx expo install expo dev client because we need it.
And after this only step is to run the we can say.
development of basically a build command.
So I can say EAS build perfect hyphen hyphen platform and platform is going to be as Android
and then what is the next thing?
Next thing is for which profile?
The profile is going to be.
as development.
Alright, so the moment I hit this,
perfect.
So definitely we can wait for it because
creating a build takes
so much of time, sometime.
If you are on free tier.
Perfect. So hopefully this will work
and now, yes, they are asking
me for my
Android application ID.
Let's go with the same and now they are initializing this, generate a new key store.
Yes, generate that for me.
All right.
And they are generating the key store into the cloud.
Perfect.
Till then we can wait for it.
Okay.
So now we have created the key store and now they are basically compressing our project
file.
So we can definitely wait for this as well.
Alright, so now we have basically compressed this file successfully in 9 seconds and now
they are basically uploading the EAS build towards our EAS basically to the expo account.
Everything is I think done.
Cool.
Nice.
So now our build is in queue and definitely they are going to take some time.
You can just simply open it, grab a cup of coffee and whatever you want it to do because
this will definitely going to take some time.
Perfect.
We are in queued and less than five minutes remaining.
Skip the queue with the plan.
Not now.
All right.
So let's just wait for it and then I'll be right back.
Alright guys, so after you can see that 15 minutes we have successfully and I think after
16 minutes 58 seconds we have successfully built this.
Alright, so now let's move ahead and install the development build.
Let me quickly open this.
Let's go, just give me a minute.
Alright, so now you can see this is what we have and I can simply press on install and
With the help of my camera I can simply
Perfect.
And then let me just quickly visit to the website and then I can press on install.
So this is basically going to start downloading this and let just wait for the download completion.
I can simply press on details.
And we are downloading it.
All right, let me wait for it once again.
All right, so we have installed it and then let me just simply press for installation.
Yes, this is module 12.
I can press on install.
All right, so we have installed it successfully and then I can simply open this.
Perfect.
And then I can run Bunnex Expo Start.
So, this is basically going to start it's in use.
All right, where it is using?
I don't know.
Let me just close all the application and then let me rerun it.
8081 is in use.
All right, just give me a minute.
All right, now let me rerun it.
And yes, now we are on to development build.
And I can simply press A. So, this is basically going to start open this here.
Perfect.
So, first up is always going to be same.
Let me coming to here once again and let me simply reload this and let me open this.
Hopefully this will work right now.
Let me simply press on continue.
Let me off my server and I think let me close this as well.
And let me open this.
All right.
And let me also run my application and at this time this will work.
Don't worry.
And I can simply press A. So this is going to open this inside my phone.
So what if I reload it?
What if I reopen it?
Perfect.
And yes, look at that.
This is how they look to us.
Amazing.
So, now let us move ahead and start implementing it.
So, implementation is very simple.
These are just bunch of things we need to do.
So, first thing that I wanted you to is to simply import bunch of things.
Perfect.
So, for importing purpose let me import all of them.
So, I have imported here use state, use effect and then bunch of components from react native
and then notification from expo notification.
Easy.
So, always for using the notification first thing that we need to do is to configure that.
So, I can simply say notifications dot set notification handler yes this method got it
and first of all let me off my AI and inside this after that what I can do we have here
one method known as handle notification and this is going to be a async method.
And let me just quickly open it and inside this you can see we have bunch of properties.
So some of them is let me just copy them and paste it.
Nice.
So the first thing that I have is should show alert.
Second thing what just happened?
True true false is missing the following property notification behavior should show banner.
All right, let me just open and for now, what if I make it true and I think we have one
more left if I'm not wrong and let's say right now, let me mark it as false.
All right, so these are only first thing that I made true is should play sound and should
show banner.
All right, we'll see that and show alert.
And, then what is the next step?
Next step is also very simple.
We simply wanted to maintain a permission state.
So, this is just a simple state variable.
First thing is permission granted and set permission granted.
And, then I wanted you to create here a function, very simple function that is going to name
as check permission is equals to async.
And, inside this I can simply name it as status and this is equals to await notifications.get
permission async simple nothing rocket science going on here and then simply say set permission
granted.
this we have access of this status.
And, if this is equal to equal to what?
This is equal to equal to granted.
Alright, so this means this is what we are basically checking it.
And then first thing is simply run a use effect.
So, what is this use effect?
For the first time this is going to run.
Check the permission and if the permission status is granted then set this otherwise
let us move ahead and create a function name is request notification.
So this is for checking purpose next one is for request I can say notification permission
is equals to a sink.
And then I can simply open try and catch, easy.
And first thing is again simple going to be const status and this is equals to await notifications
dot request yes request permission async.
So, we are basically asking for permissions.
And then simple bunch of things.
First thing is if status is not equal to granted, then simply show here alert, permission not
granted.
Simple and if the platform operating system is Android, then simply write this code.
Perfect.
And let me also import my platform here.
So, this is basically saying platform.os if it is Android, then simply say await notifications,
set notification channel as default and the name and the importance.
So, for now, I have added this as Max and again, you never need to just dig into the rabbit
hole and just try to understand everything that is not important for now.
All right.
And then at the end, you can simply say set permission as true.
But any chance we have any error, then I can simply show alert as error.
All right.
Nice.
And then let's move ahead first of all, and let me add a bunch of UI for it.
So for that, I can simply paste this UI and I can import my style sheet.
So I have a simple container.
a title or status and a button container.
Alright and then let me paste the whole UI for it.
Alright so now you can see that this is basic of view which have a text and then permission
status.
Alright and then a simple button.
Which is first of all requesting a permission and then second one is sending a notification
on demand.
Alright, so sending a notification is again very easy point.
So what if I just simply copy and paste that.
Alright, so this is simple a function.
What is the name of it?
Send notification.
Again, checking for permission and this is how you register and schedule.
a notification, this is a local notification, so notification, schedule notification, whatever
the content and the trigger and then again a simple alert.
Alright, but if I save it, so right now you can see they are saying me permission is not
granted, let try to use it, if I just simply say request permission, look at that, allow
to send you notification.
Let me simply allow this.
Now we have successfully given them the basic point for it.
Alright.
And now if I just simply press on test send notification, look at that.
Hello from expo this is the local notification and if you open this look at that how beautifully
we have successfully created our first in-app notification again this is not that advance
in next chapter I am going to show you how you can basically customize this change the
logo change the background and how are you wanted to do so but for this this is pretty
much it and see you next time.